# Questions and Answers

## For how long will my files be stored?

Files will be removed if they have not been viewed for 30 days. A view is
counted when someone visits the file's download page (pixeldrain.com/u/somefile)
or views the file through a list the file is included in
(pixeldrain.com/l/somelist).

If you upload a file while logged into your pixeldrain account you will be able
to delete the file yourself from the download page of the file. If you are not
logged in and you accidentally upload something you shouldn't have, just don't
share the link. The file will expire eventually. File links are not indexed or
published anywhere. As long as you don't share it nobody will see it.

## Does pixeldrain cost any money?

No, pixeldrain is completely free at the moment. While there is an advertisement
on the file downloading page, it doesn't generate nearly enough revenue to pay
for maintaining this service. That's why I'd really appreciate it if you could
spare some coins. Possible methods for donating are:

 * <a href="https://www.patreon.com/join/pixeldrain" target="_blank">
	{{template `patreon.svg` .}} Support me on Patreon and get some perks too!
   </a>
 * Bitcoin:
   [1Ne7hGuvnfz9EFTRD3PLWVeaJTX9oA1QUr](bitcoin:1Ne7hGuvnfz9EFTRD3PLWVeaJTX9oA1QUr?label=Pixeldrain%20Donation)
 * BasicAttentionToken: Donate BAT by clicking the BAT icon in your address bar.
   If you don't have Brave browser yet you can download it here: <a
   class="button button_highlight" href="https://brave.com/pix009"
   target="_blank">Install Brave</a>. Installing and using Brave with this
   referral link also counts as a 5$ donation.
 * Siacoin:
   26117c19ca3975b315d663dcbbc19cf9c07274f441689d4392ed380b2337589ef1aacfbdc93f
   (this address points directly at the storage backend. Donations will be used
   for paying storage contracts with Sia hosts)
 * PayPal: <a class="button button_highlight"
   href="https://www.paypal.com/cgi-bin/webscr?cmd=_s-xclick&hosted_button_id=WU49A5NHPAZ9G&source=url">
   Donate with PayPal</a>

## Do I need to register an account?

Not if you don't want to. You're free to use pixeldrain completely anonymously.
Without a pixeldrain account you can upload files, download files and create
lists of files. And view your uploaded files on the [history page](/history).
This page only shows files which were uploaded anonymously in this web browser.

By registering an account on pixeldrain you will be able to access your files
from any device with a web browser. Files you upload and lists you create will
be linked to your pixeldrain account and will show up on your [personal home
page](/user).

## What cookies does pixeldrain use?

When logging in to a pixeldrain account a cookie named 'pd_auth_key' will be
installed. This cookie keeps your login session active. When you delete it you
will be logged out of your account.

When you use the style selector on the [Appearance](/appearance) page a cookie
called 'style' will be set. This cookie controls the appearance of the website
for you.

When uploading a file pixeldrain will save a list of file links on your
browser's local storage. This data is **only** used for viewing your upload
history on the [history page](/history).

## Legality

I cannot be held liable for any illegal and / or copyrighted material that's
uploaded by the users of this application. Files uploaded to this website are
subjected to local laws. If laws are being broken, and I've been notified of the
fact I'll have to delete the offending content. If you find any files on this
domain that break the law, please contact me at
[abuse@pixeldrain.com](mailto:abuse@pixeldrain.com), and I'll take care of it.

Please share responsibly.

For other questions you can reach me at
[support@pixeldrain.com](mailto:support@pixeldrain.com)
